as we said last week our objective is to
delay and flatten the peak of the
epidemic by bringing forward the right
measures at the right time so that we
minimize suffering and save life and
everything we do is based scrupulously
on the best scientific advice last week
we asked everyone to stay at home if you
had one of two key symptoms high
temperature all a new and continuous
cough today we need to go further
because according to Sage the scientific
advisory committee on emergencies it
looks as though we're now approaching
the fast growth part of the upward curve
and without drastic action cases could
double every five or six days so first
we need to ask you to ensure that if you
or anyone in your household has one of
those two symptoms then you should stay
at home for 14 days that means that if
possible you should not go out even to
buy food or essentials other than for
exercise and in that case at a safe
distance from others if necessary you
should ask for help from others for your
daily necessities and if that is not
possible then you should do what you can
to limit your social contact when you
leave the house to get supplies and even
if you don't have symptoms and if no one
in your household has symptoms there is
more that we need you to do now so
second now is the time for everyone to
stop non-essential contact with others
and to stop all unnecessary travel we
need people to start working from home
where they possibly
and you should avoid pubs clubs theaters
and other such social venues it goes
without saying repeat the message we
should all only use the NHS when we
really need to and please go online
rather than ringing NHS one one one
now this advice about avoiding all
unnecessary social contact is
particularly important for people over
70 for pregnant women and for those with
health conditions with some health
conditions and if you ask why are we
doing this now why now why not earlier
or or later why bring in this very
draconian measure the answer is that we
are asking people to do something that
is difficult and disruptive of their
lives and the right moment as we've
always said is to do it when it is most
effective when we think it can make the
biggest difference to slowing the spread
of the disease reducing the number of
victims reducing the number of
fatalities and as we take these steps we
should be focusing on the most
vulnerable so third in a few days time
by this coming weekend it will be
necessary to go further and to ensure
that those with the most serious health
conditions are largely shielded from
contact from social contact for around
12 weeks and again the reason for doing
this in the next few days rather than
earlier or later is that this is going
to be very disruptive for people who
have such conditions difficult for them
but I believe it's now necessary and we
want to ensure that this period of
shielding this period of maximum
protection coincides with the peak of
the disease and it's now clear that the
peak of the epidemic is coming
faster in some parts of the country but
then in others and it looks as though
London is now a few weeks ahead
so to relieve the pressure on the London
health system and to slow the spread in
London it's important that Londoners now
pay special attention to what we're
saying about avoiding non-essential
contact and to take particularly
seriously the advice about working from
home and avoiding confined spaces such
as pubs and restaurants lastly it
remains true as we've said in the last
few weeks that risks of transmission of
the disease at mass gatherings such as
sporting events are relatively low but
obviously logically as we advise against
unnecessary social contact of all kinds
it's right that we should extend that
advice to mass gatherings as well and so
we've also got to ensure that we have
the critical workers we need that might
otherwise be deployed are those
gatherings to deal with this emergency
so so from tomorrow we will no longer be
supporting mass gatherings with
emergency workers in the way that we
normally do so mass gatherings we're now
moving emphatically away from and I know
that many people including Milton
millions of fit and active people over
70 may feel listening to what I have
just said that there is something
excessive about these measures but I
have to say I believe they are
overwhelmingly worth it to slow the
spread of the disease to reduce the peak
to save life minimize suffering and to
give our NHS the chance to cope over the
last few days I've been comparing notes
and talking to leaders around the world
and I can tell you that the the UK is
now
leading a growing global campaign
amongst all our friends and allies
whether in the g7 the g20 UN the IMF all
those bodies in which we play a
significant role we're leading a
campaign to fight back against this
disease to keep the economy growing to
make sure that humanity has access to
the drugs and the treatments that we all
need and the UK is also at the front of
the effort to back a business to back
our economy to make sure that we get
through it I know that we are today
asking a lot of everybody is far more
now than just washing your hands though
they're clearly washing your hands
remains important but I can tell you
that across this country people and
businesses in my experience are
responding with amazing energy and
creativity to the challenge that we face
and I want to thank everybody for the
part that you are playing and that
you're gonna play our chief scientific
adviser will now update us on where we
are over to you Patrick thank you so
long sage measures that can save lives
and protect people objectives as I laid
out last time are to really suppress the
curve in order to keep it below NHS
capacity so that the NHS can cope and to
shield the vulnerable and those most
likely to get severe disease so that we
protect them across this period most
people it's worth reminding us have a
mild disease but some do not this is a
very fast-moving situation the latest
numbers that we reviewed at Sage
suggests that we're entering a fast
growth period or on the cusp of doing so
and London is ahead of other parts of
the country we at the outset laid out a
plan and advised that we would implement
it
the measures at the right stage and in
the right combination the right
combination to ensure that we get the
biggest impact
unfortunately that time is now for many
of these measures what we're doing is
implementing them actually at a stage of
the epidemic which is a little bit
earlier than has been done in some other
countries given where we are in terms of
the epidemic now the measures have two
objectives one is to delay the
transmission of this virus across the
community and the second is to keep
people safe
the measures as the Prime Minister is
outlined include whole household
isolation so if one person gets the
symptoms of new persistent cough or
fever the whole household stays isolated
for 14 days
the reason it's 14 days is the seven
days for the person who's got the
infection the incubation period that
others may catch it and the seven days
after that we're also recommending
increased social distancing that's the
phrase that you hear which means trying
to reduce contact between people again
to try to delay this transmission that
means where businesses can do it and
where individuals can do it home working
is recommended unnecessary travel should
be reduced and stopped avoiding
gatherings and crowded places is
important and those gatherings big or
small are important so that you get the
whole thing together it's not just the
size of a gathering it's actually all
gatherings which become important and
reducing social contacts there are
specific measures for the vulnerable
groups the people who are most likely to
get serious illness with this infection
and Chris witty will say more about that
those measures would need to go on for
12 weeks or so across this period maybe
a little longer
these measures like case isolation that
we talked about last week staying at
home if you've got the symptoms these
new measures have a big effect this is
not a series of small interventions you
would anticipate that this could have a
dramatic effect to reduce the peak and
to reduce death rate they are not easy
but they are important and they will
have the effect if we all do it this is
a matter for us to take accountability
to make sure we help each other protect
ourselves and protect the NHS it is also
possible as laid out in the plan that
other measures may be necessary
including at some point as we've said it
may be necessary to think about things
like school closures but those things
again need to be done at the right time
in the right way at the right stage of
the outbreak I'll hand over to Chris
thank you I'm just going to add a few
comments additionally from a medical
point of view but a mark I'm not gonna
repeat points that already made and the
first thing is to make an obvious point
that this is a now a very global disease
and the way you deal with global
pandemics is different in public towns
health terms than the way you would deal
with a localized outbreak where you're
the first country or a very significant
region that is has got it and the second
point is the obvious point again that in
this country this disease is now
accelerating up the curve but it is
still at a low level but it will
accelerate up now
really quite rapidly now we obviously
need to do things that are both
effective and all the measures that are
here have been gone over by several
large numbers of scientists in different
ways looking at mathematical models
behavioral sciences many other forms of
science to find the things which are the
most effective but they also have to be
sustainable because this is going to go
on for some time
and I think we should not be
under any illusions that if we just do
this for a couple of weeks that is
sufficient this is going to have to be a
prolonged period now for any individual
person let me start off with the most
cheery point about this for any
individual person the chances of dying
from coronavirus are actually very low
some people will not get the infection
and many of the measures we're doing at
the moment will help with that some
people will get it and will have no
symptoms at all they won't even realize
they've had it of those who do have
symptoms the majority will have either a
mild disease or a moderate disease
meaning they can easily manage it at
home without having to go to the NHS
directly or indirectly in any other way
but obviously a small minority but a
significant one get significant disease
requiring hospital care a small
proportion of those will go on to need
intensive care and sadly some people
will go on to die and as we've discussed
before the overall mortality rate looks
as if it's a bit less than 1% on current
data but that's without knowing how many
people get the disease a symptomatically
but we know some people get it now we
also know that older people are at
greater risk and that is widely known
but it is important I think to stress
that being olds does not necessarily
mean you'll get it worse and actually
there was a rather nice article by my
Minister Nadine Doris who actually
explained when she had coronavirus her
mother who caught it from her had it
more mildly so it's not a necessary fact
that older people will necessarily have
it worse so you might say why with the
disease where we have such small numbers
at the moment and which the great
majority people are going to recover
from and most of them will have a mild
or or non non noticeable disease would
we want to do anything at all and the
reason is this acceleration and not
overall aim and our single aim is to
reduce death rates and the numbers of
people who might die as a result of this
but I think it's important to recognize
and
the reason I'm explaining this is so
people understand the logic of what
we're doing that there are broadly three
groups of death deaths and other impacts
on health we need to consider there are
the direct deaths which are caused by
the coronavirus disease itself with good
medical care tragically a few people the
great majority of them in less good
health but not necessarily all will pass
away
there are however and this is really
important a significant number of other
deaths which if the NHS became
overwhelmed in any of the four nations
if the intensive care has got care units
got to the point when they were
overwhelmed then people would die from
indirect deaths because they did not
have the ability to get medical care and
a lot of what we are trying to do is
trying to reduce the chance that those
indirect deaths might occur and then the
third possibility and it is an important
one for us to consider is that some of
the measures we are doing well
undoubtedly or could have negative
impacts on people's health it themselves
so there are negative effects of what we
do to try and combat the corona virus
one of the reasons we are very keen not
to go in advance of need was because of
those negative facts and I've come on to
one of them later on
now just to explain where the different
things fall into this the very profound
changes in terms of social distancing
that the Prime Minister laid out which
are going to be very difficult for
people to maintain over long period of
time and will have very significant
social effects do you have the capacity
significantly to pull down the peak of
this infection wave and therefore make
it easier for the NHS and particularly
the ventilation support to be able to
cope with the wave that is heading its
way so that is really critical people
who do this who restricts their social
gathering are doing things to protect
the NHS to allow people allow the NHS to
treat both people with coronavirus and
people who have other things as well it
is overall effect
on the NHS this is the second group of
things which the Prime Minister is laid
out are those things that we want the
quite large group of people who either
are over 70 possibly quite healthy or
very healthy over 70 but over seventy or
who are younger than 70 but have a
significant health condition and this is
mainly in adults we want them to take
even greater care because this is in
addition to making sure that they don't
end up helping fuel the epidemic
themselves it means they do not have to
go to hospital which is good for the NHS
but most importantly it reduces the risk
that they will catch the virus
particular to time when the NHS is under
strain this is absolutely critical and
the we're going the group of people who
will want to take this advice
particularly seriously are older people
above 70 people who in adult life would
normally be advised to have the flu
vaccinations so these are people with
chronic diseases such as chronic heart
disease or chronic kidney disease and
also as a precautionary measure because
we are early in our understanding of
this virus and we want to be sure women
who are pregnant and those three groups
are the groups we want to take
particular care to minimise their social
contact which will of course will have
very significant risks for them and
later on we will be giving a very
shortly a much more specific list of an
even smaller group of people who have
very profound health problems they all
know they got very profound health
problems for example people who might
have advanced myeloma or leukemia things
that significantly affect their immune
system the final that is being
talked about today is in addition to
what we've previously talked about is
the 14 days stay at home if one person
in the in the household has symptoms the
whole household stays at home now there
has to be some common sense around this
if there's a very vulnerable person in
the household for example will
people will need to take that into
account we'll need to think people need
to think through the practicalities of
their own position but the reason for
this is because they are helping to stop
it be transmitted on to the rest of the
community and these people the trouble
is if you actually are in a household
with someone who's got coronavirus there
is a reasonably high chance you will be
infected and will go on together so this
is in a sense some things people are
doing to help protect the rest of
society we do want to stress that the
great majority of these people will have
mild or moderate disease they don't need
to contact the NHS they can get they can
use in it the NHS online services very
extensive information there we really
would encourage them not if they have
mild or moderate disease to phone one
one one because the service we need to
protect for those who are are are in
greatest need but really important to
stress if anybody's health starts to
deteriorate significantly then they
should phone one one one or contact the
health services in the way they usually
would so this is if people deteriorate
we'd want to make it clear they should
then do so finally I just want to make a
point on behalf of my other cno's of
hope for all four nations we are
enormous ly proud of what our colleagues
in the NHS and public health have done
so far to delay this and to do so in a
safe way and enormous amount of work has
gone on to do that the next few weeks
and months are going to be
extraordinarily difficult for the NHS in
all four nations we know that our
colleagues will rise this challenge but
we know it is going to be very hard
indeed but we have enormous faith in
them thank you very much well thank you
very much Chris well I want to thank
both Chris and Patrick immensely for all
their the work that they've been doing
over the last few weeks and months and I
know it's a big imposition but we're
gonna we're gonna be making sure that we
give daily updates to you what I do
think that would be that would be
valuable so that we can have as I as I
said in the vini as much
transparency as possible I really try
and show our working and our thinking as
clearly as possible to the British
public questions now please Vickie young
BBC Prime Minister looking at these
measures can I ask you about enforcement
are you closing theaters pubs
restaurants down as of today and a
particular question which we've heard at
the BBC lots of customers about care
homes are you going to stop visitors
going into care homes and lots of people
very concerned about that and then on a
more scientific question about testing
the director-general of the World Health
Organization has just said a clear
message to countries to test test test
you cannot fight a fire blindfolded test
every suspected case lots of people
wondering how you can track the pandemic
in this country if you don't know who's
got it yes so thanks Vicky willing
absolutely what we're doing is giving
very strong advice that public venues
such as theatres we should no nor good
be visited there though the proprietors
of those venues are taking the logical
steps that you'd imagine you're seeing
that the change happen already
as for enforcement we have the powers if
if necessary but I don't believe that it
will be necessary to use those powers
when it comes to care homes and visitors
to take care of homes you can take it
from what we've just said about avoiding
all unnecessary contact for those
particular groups you know a really
strong advice that we're giving to
people to avoid unnecessary contact with
the over 70s those with particular
health conditions absolutely we don't
want to see people unnecessarily
visiting cans of course we completely
agree with the secretary on all that
testing is absolutely critical and
within the UK we have three levels of
testing at the moment we have testing in
intensive care systems which is across
the whole system is a complete
surveillance system we have testing in
hospitals for people who've got any
people got milder disease and we have
the GP network which is testing in the
community the one thing which we did
stop doing was testing based on
geography which was early on because at
this stage geography is much less
important in the disease now we do
intend to continue to scale up testing
but I think it's important to realize
the scale of UK testing which has been
substantial and just to give are just
some numbers on that over 44,000 tests
conducted of which 42 over 22,000 were
negative and we will continue to scale
up the testing every single week from
here on him moving out into the wider
community
the tests we have at the moment only
tests for people who've currently got
disease the thing which will be
transformational would be a test to
reliably tell us if someone has
previously had disease so we can pick up
and find out what proportion of people
get this infection without any symptoms
currently such a test is not reliable
but it's being developed very rapidly
public public health England
thanks Beth Ruby's got news
Thank You Prime Minister and this is
quite a big step change from where we
were even four days ago but in other
Western European countries in the u.s.
they're going further still they're
states of emergency cities enforced
lockdown families been asked to stay at
home even if they are not ill schools
closed
are these the sorts of measures you
think the public should expect in the
next few days and if I may sir Patrick a
question for you use talked about London
when do you think London will hit the
peak what's the timeframe and in terms
of cases of coronavirus across the
country now last what you said up to
10,000 people
last Thursday how many people now do you
think are carrying the virus thank you
well that's just on where we are in
relation to two others don't don't
forget that if other countries are in
different stages in their movement
the up the curve and we've always made
it very clear that the crucial thing is
timeliness our interventions should be
should be timely to have the the maximum
effect and we think this is the right
package for this particular moment as we
start to move up the curve in the way
that we've we've said and as we
foreshadowed over the last over the last
couple of weeks but when you when you
come to more extreme measures like you
know curfews and so on and so forth
you'll see in some of the other
countries you know we're keeping all
measures under review and and
particularly obviously people will be
thinking about about school closures
there is an argument about about school
closures we think at the moment on
balance it's much better if we can keep
schools open for for all sorts of
reasons but you know I appreciate that
this is again something that we need to
keep under review in answer to the
question about about where is London on
the P the important thing is that London
is ahead in terms of reaching that
inflection point of actually going into
a faster growth phase clearly the
measures that have been talked about our
aim to completely suppress that and
therefore the peak goes much further out
so this is a sort of slower thing with a
reduced number that's what we're trying
to achieve numbers well the epidemic
you'd expect to double every five days
or so so you can work out you know there
many more as from last week and you can
do sort of calculations as to how many
you think you may have the absolutely
key thing to reiterate what Chris witty
is said is testing and ramping up our
ability to test and in that new this
ability to test who has had the disease
rather than who has just got it now both
of those things are really important to
get a proper handle on this especially
this question of how many people have
had it and been asymptomatic that is the
biggest unknown worldwide that would
completely change all sorts of things if
we can get a handle on that number
thanks Robert
couple of questions and first your
restrictions on freedom of movement your
urge to families and households to
isolate these are voluntary
they obviously kind of carry great force
because they're coming from the
government now in some countries they
have introduced criminal sanctions if
individuals refuse to obey what is
effectively a curfew how likely is it
how prepared are you to introduce
criminal sanctions if necessary an
honest issue of testing one issue that I
hear repeatedly from people in the
health service is they are deeply
uncomfortable about being forced home if
they've got a cough because they'd like
to continue to work will you at least
for health service workers move fast to
allow health service workers to be
tested so that they at least know
whether they are a risk to their
patients ask Chris to deal with that
with testing but on powers actually
Robert you may be amazed to know this
this this country already has government
already has tremendous powers in in this
field under an act of 1984 I think it's
open to the the Secretary of State for
help to ban handshaking if he if he
wants to but but but I think most people
would would accept that we are a mature
and and grown-up and liberal democracy
where people understand very clearly the
advice that that that is being given to
them and I think they also understand
that what we're saying obviously helps
the NHS and helps them it helps us all
as individuals but it helps the whole
community as well I think the British
public do understand that in answer to
the question on testing the the next
level out once we have the capacity to
do this which is we're really going for
very fast is exactly as you said
that healthcare and indeed other
critical workers that you can actually
test them very early on in their illness
if they end up having actually the right
symptoms but in a sense the wrong
disease good disease not coronavirus
then they will be able to go back to
work which is good for NHS good for
society if they have got it at least you
know they've got it and they're not
going to get it again and so that's you
know a positive or a negative or
therefore useful for the service so
there's a very strong incentive to get
this out as fast as we can practically
manage it Jason great day man thank you
Jason goes from The Daily Mail I mean
you've just announced the most
extraordinary measures saying people
shouldn't go to the pub they shouldn't
go to cinemas they shouldn't go to
theaters what are you going to do to
support those businesses which are
looking at the next three months and
thinking we're going to collapse if this
happens and so Patrick you told us in
this room on Thursday I think we were
about four weeks behind Italy we seem to
be moving through the gears extremely
rapidly now are we were you wrong about
where we were on that curve last week
are we further up it than then the
scientists thought we were well first of
all Jason you're absolutely right this
is going to be a very considerable
challenge for businesses big and small
and we're going to make sure that we do
everything we can to give them the
liquidity that they need make sure that
they have the time to pay but also make
sure in our whole fiscal policy that way
we the way we look at our whole
tax-and-spend system that we give
business the space in which they can
come back from this in which and I've no
doubt at all that we'll be working
closely with as I said I don't we'll be
working closely with all our partners
around the world to coordinate our
response in response to the question of
where are we and at the early stage is
an outbreak the numbers are quite small
so actually the precision with which you
can predict exactly where you are is low
and I said that I thought we perhaps
four weeks behind what Italy was
I think the new numbers suggest with
maybe more like three weeks in terms of
that and that's really why we've and and
importantly it looks like we're on the
sort of fast upswing or just about to
get there and that's the reason to want
to come in quite quickly with with these
measures thanks George Financial Times
so George Parker from the FT you're
speaking to some of your g7 colleagues
prime minister and you just mentioned
the tax-and-spend issue do you think
there's a case for a general global
fiscal stimulus leaving aside specific
measures to help struggling businesses
the second question about the the
ventilators how many ventilators do you
think you can get in hospitals very
quickly if manufacturers help you and
don't you regret not having started this
process before first of all on the on
the fiscal stimulus I think there's a
widespread agreement amongst colleagues
in the in the g7 that we are going to
need to make sure everybody has access
to liquidity and that the if we do
things
jointly then I think that the global
markets will understand that we're all
not really operating in the same sort of
fiscal framework and I think we'll be
much more successful that way so there's
a lot of work going on on that George
and on the on the issue of of all types
of medical equipment perhaps the more
like what I can say is we've talked
we've talked a lot in these discussions
about what we're doing to flatten the
curve to squash the somber arrow to
depress the the the the graph of the
growth of the cases and of course that's
going on that's what we're doing today
but there's a parallel body of work
which is equally energetic which is
devoted to making sure that the NHS has
all the equipment that it needs and I
could tell you that huge huge strides
are being being made right now on on
delivering ventilators testing kids
oxygen everything that we think we'll
need in the weeks ahead Gordon
great Thank You Gordon Rayner from The
Telegraph prime minister and answer
Patrick last week sir Patrick in
particular was talking about herd
immunity we've heard today of a case in
Japan where somebody has reportedly
tested positive twice having had it once
they've now got it again does that mean
that herd immunity is now completely out
of the window and Chris what he was
saying just now I think that if you test
people and they have had the disease
that means they can't get it again and
they can go back to work are you
absolutely sure about that in the light
of what we've heard today from Japan the
second um so the first thing just to
reiterate the objectives and they've
always been objectives is to make
absolutely sure we flatten this curve
keep it below NHS capacity limits that's
the private primary aim and of course to
make sure that we save lives and protect
the vulnerable that's what we need to
focus on in any infectious disease there
are cases where people can catch
something again they're rare there's
nothing to suggest that this is a common
occurrence in this disease but we are
learning as we go along but at the
moment there is nothing particular to
suggest that and we already know that
there are some people who've had what
are called neutralizing antibodies that
have actually stopped it so that it
looks like a normal response to an
infection and there will be occasions
very rare where somebody might get it
more than once as in any any disease any
infectious disease so does that add to
that I mean even in diseases which do
not have long lasting immunity there's
usually a short period of immunity and
that's enough for a season and was an
epidemic in the initial phases so I
think it's important to differentiate
between that and long-lived community of
course if if people don't induce very
long-lived immunity that makes the idea
of a vaccine less certain so I think we
need to be aware of that and we'll be
watching this very carefully as the
final thing is I haven't seen the
details of this report if people have
got immunosuppression or various other
things they can make this more likely
but it's a it's an involved
and it's always always worth stressing
what I think we said can continuously I
which is our objective our overriding
objective in all cases is to reduce
suffering to minimize the incidence of
this disease and to save life that's the
that's the absolute priority
can I just one other point which is
which is Right the way from the
beginning we described four things one
of which was research and research is
unbelievably important in this and the
UK is outstanding at clinical science
and the biological sciences that
underpin this and so the research in the
UK is going to be an important part of
tackling this and parts of an important
international effort to make sure that
we get on top of this Thanks thank you
first of all can you give the nation any
form of indication how long this ban on
social contact will last to prepare them
should they prepare for a couple of
weeks a couple months you know the whole
year and secondly in terms affects the
economy obviously no blame intended but
clearly this has gone far further than
the Chancellor might have thought last
week even when he was delivering his
budget which was predestined on 1.1
percent growth this year do you accept
now the economy is not gonna grow by 1.1
percent and the Chancellor is going to
have to spend an awful lot more public
money propping up businesses yeah just
on the on the on the the timing I think
I might I might defer to the experts on
either side of it but but just on the on
where we are with with the ecology it's
perfectly obvious just even the the g7
conversation I was having today
everybody sees that this is going this
is going to be potentially a severe blow
for the economy everybody can see the
the the risks that this situation poses
the risk to demand the risks to supply
but if we get it right and if we get the
right response and if we work together
then we can ensure that it is a
short-term
problem because the fundamentals of the
UK economy are very strong it this is
unlike 2008 there isn't a systemic
problem within the the economy if we can
if we can get the disease under control
in the way that we're describing if we
can if we can flatten that peak and it
starts eventually to decline and tails
off across well then there's absolutely
no reason why economies worldwide should
not come roaring back so it's a very
very different category of difficulty
from from 2008 I think people understand
that but on the on you know fine in
Chris I we stressed right from the
beginning this is gonna be a marathon
not a sprint and I stressed at the
beginning of the points I made that
sustainability is absolutely critical
here this is not a situation where a
couple of weeks in this virus is on the
way absolutely not
people should be thinking of a minimum
of weeks to months and depending how it
goes it may be longer so I think this it
is really important people don't realize
they're in for the long haul on this but
this is really important if we're to
defend the ability of the NHS to treat
people if we're to actually minimize the
mortality we've got to see this as a
long game Victoria Donald channel 4 can
I ask just a little while ago we were
told last week indeed that it was seven
days isolation was it that the science
moved so much all that you made a
mistake on that and also could you tell
me about the advice on pregnant women
because we there has been there have
been reports of course of babies at the
weekend being born and then testing
positive but there have been no reports
of a new troe transmission so I take the
second one and Patrick takes words in
terms of pregnancy there are reports of
well actually in the global literature
at this point in time one person who
became severely ill but we're very very
early
what we know on this the Royal Cottage
obstetrics and gynaecology which is the
professional body review the evidence
it's on the wet day website and and it
was before this case was reported and it
makes clear that in the very small
number of Keio of people of pregnant
women who delivered at or shortly around
the time they had this there were
absolutely no complications but there
are two buts to this for many infectious
diseases there is a small but
appreciable additional risk and we will
not know that until a lot more women
have had children we do not know for
sure we can say reliably this is safe or
there is some additional risk and of
course this is a very new virus so the
information we have is relevant to
people in the third trimester of
pregnancy but not in the earlier stages
of pregnancy and make giving a long
answer because this is something people
get very concerned about but there is no
evidence from other coronaviruses that
makes us feel this is particularly
dangerous in the way there for example
the Zika virus was particularly
dangerous to pregnant women but
infections and pregnancy are not a good
combination in general and that is why
we've taken the very precautionary
measure whilst we try and find out more
to include pregnant women in the group
alongside older women and people who've
got pre-existing significant health
conditions we may in retrospect find
that was overkill but we'd rather be
more cautionary now rather than the
other way first things to really
reiterate what Chris has just said this
is a brand new disease we need to learn
as we go along and that will be part of
what we do the seven days actually isn't
a change so it's a it's a little bit
complicated and I just want to explain
it if you are ill with the symptoms of
either new persistent cough or fever you
isolate yourself for seven days so if
you lived on your own that's what you
would do that's the advice we gave last
week now we're saying if anybody in the
family gets it or anyone in the
household gets it the entire household
stays together isolated for 14 days the
reason for that is the other people may
pick it up
over the seven days or five days period
and then they've got seven days to have
it and get better or to be asymptomatic
that have it for seven days so it's two
different periods but the principle is
the same when you've got symptoms you're
seven days if you got that it's a
difference between individual isolation
and an household isolation them Heather
Heather shoot from The Guardian and be
taught their premise tour about giving
businesses the space to deal with this
crisis I wonder whether you think you
might need to take more action to give
low-paid households your space to deal
with it you may now have a situation
where couples are both having to take 14
days off work the budget measures relied
on statutory sick pay but that's less
than a hundred pounds a week do you
think it had to do more well Heather
we're doing we certainly will be
bringing forward to all the measures
that we can mean we're lifting the
living wage by a huge amount as you know
and were making sure that statutory sick
pay and benefits are payable as soon as
as soon as possible but the general
principle that's guiding us because you
know you're totally right we're going to
have to look after people and help them
for a considerable period is that nobody
should be penalized for for doing the
right thing so you know we hope very
much that people listening to this will
feel that they can take the measures
that we've outlined in the knowledge
that they will be protected
so Dennis Taunton from The Irish Times
Thank You Prime Minister the Irish
government has introduced more
aggressive measures on social distancing
including the closure of schools but the
executive in Northern Ireland is
following the same pace as the
government in the rest of the United
Kingdom are you confident that the
people in Northern Ireland are being
protected from this virus as effectively
as their neighbors in the south I
absolutely am and and we had a good
discussion just now with that with
Arlene and Michelle and and actually if
you look at what's happening overall the
UK and our
on our on very much the same path but
perhaps a Patrick and Chris anything you
want to say about the school's issues
anymore no I think I think we've covered
the school's issue and I think the key
thing is the social distancing actions
that we're taking around bars and
restaurants and theatres a song which is
a really important part of this which is
probably in more extreme in terms of in
terms of the action there but the one
thing I think it is worth just adding to
that it's just to reiterate the point
that thankfully this forest seems to
spare children relative to other ages
and we are you know Dennis we are in
bring in daily contact with with our
counterparts and with the teachers
office and so on to make sure that were
coordinating things as much as much as
we reasonably can yes sir
Thank You Prime Minister Michael settle
from The Herald it's really important
that you take the public with you or
whatever you do but do you think the UK
government needs to try harder to be in
lockstep with this Scottish government
because any perceived divergence of
approach or not reassure the public
there's a unified approach and I think
it was Sir Patrick you said that London
was ahead in the outbreak do you think
Prime Minister that Westminster can stay
up and until do you lie well Michael
that could very mean very good point
about what's going on with all four
nations and actually if you've been at
the Cobra just now it was a very very
good discussion between us and and all
the other devolved administration's
everybody's on the same page where you
can see the importance of the measures
that we've we've outlined today and on
your on your point about Westminster we
will obviously be wanting to make sure
that as I say the democracy carries on
that we protect our our parliamentary
institutions but clearly those who are
vulnerable and lots of members of
parliament of both houses may come into
that category should receive the the
protections that they they need and as I
just add that I just heard just to
reassure people I and I I speak to my
counterpart chief medical officers in
all four nations very regularly often
several times a day they listen in on
the Sage discussions and contribute
under Sir Patrick and at a technical
level there's really really strong
determination to make sure we have a
unified view and understand the
technical issues together and and you
know just just on the pond the
parliamentary situation there may be
more to come on this the the the speaker
and all parties and the
the leader allows Commons are working
together to to find a way forward that
that achieves those those objectives
protecting our democracy ensuring that
our Parliament stays open but obviously
also protecting the groups we need to
protect from HuffPost
Prime Minister just to follow up on that
last point you made are you suggesting
that all parliamentarians MPs and peers
are over 70 should adhere to today's
announcements I take it you are or they
are some sort of special category and
and more importantly can we be a bit
more precise we've had a lot of vague
announcements today I mean you said for
example kept people in care homes should
not be visited and should not be
unnecessarily visited what doesn't
necessarily mean and secondly the chief
medical officer said that it may be
weeks to months that this blanket ban on
unnecessary travel and non-essential
contact less what do we mean by winks
two months and when will we know when
it's over
will the Bute an announcement by public
health England which says you can all go
back to work or what in terms of your
first question Paul about
parliamentarians but you can take this
as a universal announcement intended for
everybody there are no crisps on the the
the precision of the advice for instance
people visiting care homes so in terms
of precise advice we'll be putting on
the website a lot of precise advice I'm
not going to go through it every single
one because we could spend the rest of
the evening just going through one one
line by line but it is a really
difficult area so let me be clear that
the how to protect people in care homes
and nursing homes is going to be one of
the most challenging things for every
nation on this this question because of
course they are vulnerable and they do
have to move in and out of health
services from time to time and this is
going to be a not going to be an easy
issue anywhere in terms of the precision
of the timing this will really depend on
how the epidemic curve plays out over
time but we're very confident that the
minimum amount of time is going to be
quite a number of weeks and it will then
depend on how it plays out and we're
obviously be coming back to be much more
precise with people about how we feel
this is going as time goes by there's no
point us in a sense putting a crystal
ball in front of us and saying for sure
to all of this number of weeks but I
just wanted people to feel look this is
not a two weeks and we're done this is a
significant period of time
okay yes Harriet line from the Press
Association what are the kinds of
underlying health conditions that those
people who died after contracting
coronavirus had well in every country
they've tended to be in a sense what you
would expect as common significant
health conditions so significant
cardiovascular disease significant
respiratory disease sometimes people
who've had significant neurological
problems there are now quite quite large
studies which lay this out in quite in
quite granular detail obviously the
first experience from China where the
situation's slightly different from the
UK in terms of health services and risks
increasingly sadly information from
Italy but our own experience here
looking at those who sadly have died in
this country completely conforms with
the international experience I'm gonna
wrap it up here if I if I may I know I'm
sorry to those of you haven't be able to
get your questions in but as I've
explained there will be plenty more
opportunities in the course of the next
few days clearly what we're announcing
today is a very substantial change in
the way that we want people to live
their lives and I can't remember
anything like it in in my lifetime I
don't have really been anything like it
in in in peacetime and we have to accept
that it's a very considerable
psychological behavioral change that
we're asking you we're asking the the
the public the nation to do but I've
absolutely no doubt that we can do it
that we can do it together everybody
understands the need to do it and as I
said earlier on that
economy will eventually bounce back
because the fundamentals are strong and
we will by doing them measures that
we're doing by taking the steps that
we're taking we will ensure that we give
our NHS the space it needs and we
depress the peak as I say in the way
that our experts have described and I've
absolutely no doubt that we will also be
able in the in the time that we create
to move a lot further and faster in
developing the the treatments the the
the remedies perhaps even in hopefully
the the vaccines that will enable us to
deal with this new corona virus so thank
you all very much for your patience I
hope everybody has felt that they
understood what we're saying and I'll
see you all tomorrow thank you
[Music]